KOGITO-8740: data-index documentation (#409)
kiegroup/kogito-docs: serverlessworkflow/modules/ROOT/pages/data-index/data-index-service.adoc

= Data Index service
:compat-mode!:
// Metadata:
:description: Data Index Service use as an independent service that allow to index and query audit data in {product_name}

> :keywords: kogito, workflow, serverless, data, dataindex, data-index, index, service

Author: removed kogito from three docs keywords

// Referenced documentation pages
//Common constants
:data_index_ref: Data Index
:workflow_instance: process instance
:workflow_instances: {workflow_instance}s

[#data-index-service]
== {data_index_ref} service deployment.

{data_index_ref} service can be deployed referencing directly a distributed {data_index_ref} image. There are different images provided that take into account what persistence layer is required in each case.
In each distribution, there are some properties to configure things like the connection with the database or the communication with other services.
The goal is to configure the container to allow to process ProcessInstances and Jobs *events* that incorporate their related data, to index and store that in the database and finally, to provide the xref:data-index/data-index-core-concepts.adoc#data-index-graphql[{data_index_ref} GraphQL] endpoint to consume it.

[#data-index-service-distributions]
=== {data_index_ref} distributions
{data_index_ref} service can be deployed referencing directly a distributed {data_index_ref} image. Here there are the different {data_index_ref} image distributions that can be found in link:{distributions_url}[Quay.io/kiegroup]:

> image::data-index/data-index-distributions.png[Image of data-index different available distributions]

Reviewer: I would not show the nightly images in the screenshot

=== {data_index_ref} service deployment

> When the {data_index_ref} service is deployed, a `configMap` resource is created for the `application.properties` configuration of the {data_index_ref} service.

Reviewer: Where is that ? How do you deploy it ?

Author: I've added some more details on the deployment process. (This part was like that in kie-docs)

Reviewer: My point is: you are talking about a `configMap` and a service depoyed, but how to I deploy it and where is that configMap ?

Author: @radtriste maybe we can simplify removing any reference to that config map. As far as I know this was a way to comment how works the configuration related with the service. WDYT?

Author: Other option is to  add the link to this https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/configmap/ can clarify the idea of  that configMap, and link timeouts example with all the instructions in minikube.

Reviewer: My main worry is that you never mention Kubernetes and then you write `When the {data_index_ref} service is deployed`. But where is it deployed ?
You example just above is docker-compose. There is no Kube deployment, nor any configmap yaml example

Reviewer 2: +1 on @radtriste comment. @nmirasch it would be useful to explore the k8s deployment in another guide about data index. So there we can deep dive into this process and how to deploy it in the cloud, scale, configure persistence, etc. It will also help us identify the bottlenecks and requirements of deploying DI in the cloud so we can tailor the operator in the future to add support to it.

Author: @radtriste @ricardozanini  for now, I have added more details and descriptions on the commented standalone deployments resources and linked other guides and the timeout example that explain step by step how to deploy and use it. Please, Could you take a look and see if the information is properly sorted and meaningful?  
@ricardozanini  "it would be useful to explore the k8s deployment in another guide", I'm a bit lose with the pages structure right now. Do we need one more for configuration, for  Knative deployment, for Kafka deployment?  
Thanks both in advanced!

Reviewer: That is better. Gonna resolve that conversation. We can continue on the new opened ones :)

The name of the `configMap` resource consists of the name of the {data_index_ref} service and the suffix `-properties`, as shown in the following example:

.Example `configMap` resource generated during {data_index_ref} service deployment
[source,yaml]
----
kind: ConfigMap
apiVersion: v1
metadata:
  name: data-index-properties
data:
  application.properties : |-
    property1=value1
    property2=value2
----

The `application.properties` data of the `configMap` resource is mounted in a volume to the container of the {data_index_ref} service. Any runtime properties that you add to the `application.properties` section override the default application configuration properties of the {data_index_ref} service.

When the `application.properties` data of the `configMap` is changed, a rolling update modifies the deployment and configuration of the {data_index_ref} service.

---

=== {data_index_ref} service using PostgreSQL persistence

> {data_index_ref} service does not initialise its database schema automatically. To initialise the database schema, you need to enable Flyway migration by setting QUARKUS_FLYWAY_MIGRATE_AT_START=true.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{data_index_ref} service does not initialize its database schema automatically. To initialize the database schema, you need to enable Flyway migration by setting QUARKUS_FLYWAY_MIGRATE_AT_START=true.
```

American English 🤓

Author: yep!

> .Example `DataIndex` resource with PostgreSQL persistence enabled (requires Kafka KogitoInfra to be available):

Reviewer 2: We probably should review this section. This operator is not used in the SonataFlow context.

Author: For the moment I removed the reference to Kafka KogitoInfra

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: app.kiegroup.org/v1beta1

> kind: KogitoSupportingService

Reviewer: `KogitoSupportingService` was with the `kogito-operator`. I am not sure we want that in the documentation
cc @ricardozanini

Reviewer 2: we do not

Author: @radtriste @ricardozanini  I replaced the example that we showed in kie-docs by the one that is working in timeouts example

Reviewer: Good with the change

You can share the same {data_index_ref} instance across multiple {product_name} services during development. Sharing {data_index_ref} instances is enabled by default, therefore, only one {data_index_ref} instance is started. This behavior can be adjusted to start multiple instances using the `quarkus.kogito.devservices.shared` property.

The Quarkus Dev Service also allows further configuration options including:

* To disable {data_index_ref} Dev Service, use the `quarkus.kogito.devservices.enabled=false` property.
* To change the port where the {data_index_ref} Dev Service runs, use the `quarkus.kogito.devservices.port=8180` property.
* To adjust the provisioned image, use `quarkus.kogito.devservices.imageName=quay.io/kiegroup/kogito-data-index-ephemeral` property.
* To disable sharing the {data_index_ref} instance across multiple Quarkus applications, use `quarkus.kogito.devservices.shared=false` property.

For more information about Quarkus Dev Services, see link:{dev_services_url}[Dev Services guide].

[#data-index-service-configuration-properties]

> == {data_index_ref} service configuration properties

Reviewer: I would put that configuration as a separate page

Author: @ricardozanini maybe a new page with 'Data Index configuration' would be aligned with what we have in "Core concepts>Configuration" what do you think, does add this new page make sense?

Allows to change the event connection type. The possible values are:

* `kafka-events-support`
* `http-events-support`

| string
| `kafka-events-support`
| Yes

|`kogito.persistence.query.timeout.millis`
|Defines timeout for a query execution.
|long
|`10000`
|Yes

|`quarkus.kogito.devservices.enabled`
|Enables or disables the Dev Services for workflows. By default, the Dev Services are enabled, unless an existing configuration is present.
|boolean
|`true`
|No

|`quarkus.kogito.devservices.port`
|Defines the optional fixed port that the Dev Services listen to.
|int
|`8180`
|No

|`quarkus.kogito.devservices.image-name`
|Defines the {data_index_ref} image to use in Dev Service.
|string
|`quay.io/kiegroup/kogito-data-index-ephemeral:{page-component-version}`
|No

|`quarkus.kogito.devservices.shared`
|Indicates if the {data_index_ref} instance, which is managed by Quarkus Dev Services, is shared.
|boolean
|`true`
|No

|`quarkus.kogito.devservices.service-name`
|Defines the value of the label that is attached to the started container. This property is used when `shared` is set to `true`.
|string
|`kogito-data-index`
|No

|===

== Additional resources

> * xref:core/timeouts-support.adoc[Timeouts in {product_name}]

Reviewer: Timeouts again ? :)

Author: ups!. I've added some new references to eventing and data index core concepts

> = Data Index Service

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
= Data Index service
```

:workflow_instances: {workflow_instance}s

[#data-index-service]
== {data_index_ref} service deployment.

{data_index_ref} service can be deployed referencing directly a distributed {data_index_ref} image. There are different images provided that take into account what persistence layer is required in each case.
In each distribution, there are some properties to configure things like the connection with the database or the communication with other services.
The goal is to configure the container to allow to process ProcessInstances and Jobs *events* that incorporate the related audit data, to index and store that in the database and finally, to provide the xref:data-index/data-index-core-concepts.adoc#data-index-graphql[{data_index_ref} GraphQL] endpoint to consume it.

[#data-index-service-distributions]
=== {data_index_ref} distributions
{data_index_ref} service can be deployed referencing directly a distributed {data_index_ref} image. Here there are the different {data_index_ref} image distributions that can be found in link:{distributions_url}[Quay.io/kiegroup]:

image::data-index/data-index-distributions.png[Image of data-index different available distributions]

> === Data Index Service deployment

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
=== Data Index service deployment
```

> When the Data Index Service is deployed, a `configMap` resource is created for the `application.properties` configuration of the Data Index Service.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When the Data Index service is deployed, a `configMap` resource is created for the `application.properties` configuration of the Data Index Service.
```

> The name of the `configMap` resource consists of the name of the Data Index Service and the suffix `-properties`, as shown in the following example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The name of the `configMap` resource consists of the name of the Data Index service and the suffix `-properties`, as shown in the following example:
```

> .Example `configMap` resource generated during Data Index Service deployment

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.Example `configMap` resource generated during Data Index service deployment
```

[source,yaml]
----
kind: ConfigMap
apiVersion: v1
metadata:
  name: data-index-properties
data:
  application.properties : |-
    property1=value1
    property2=value2
----

> The `application.properties` data of the `configMap` resource is mounted in a volume to the container of the Data Index Service. Any runtime properties that you add to the `application.properties` section override the default application configuration properties of the Data Index Service.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `application.properties` data of the `configMap` resource is mounted in a volume to the container of the Data Index service. Any runtime properties that you add to the `application.properties` section override the default application configuration properties of the Data Index service.
```

When the `application.properties` data of the `configMap` is changed, a rolling update modifies the deployment and configuration of the Data Index Service.

---

> === PostgreSQL persistence with the Data Index Service

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
=== Data Index service using PostgreSQL persistence 
```

> Data Index Service does not initialize its database schema automatically. To initialize the database schema, you need to either enable automatic schema initialization using Hibernate or enabling flyway migration enabling QUARKUS_FLYWAY_MIGRATE_AT_START.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Data Index Service does not initialise its database schema automatically. To initialise the database schema, you need to enable Flyway migration by setting QUARKUS_FLYWAY_MIGRATE_AT_START=true.
```

> Automatic schema initialization using Hibernate can be enabled using the `quarkus.hibernate-orm.database.generation` property. For possible values of `quarkus.hibernate-orm.database.generation` property, see https://quarkus.io/guides/hibernate-orm#quarkus-hibernate-orm_quarkus.hibernate-orm.database.generation[Quarkus docs for database generation options]. The value can also be set as an environment variable `QUARKUS_HIBERNATE_ORM_DATABASE_GENERATION`.

Reviewer 4: hm, I think we dont need to mention this, might be confusing to end users, lets mention only Flyway

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: app.kiegroup.org/v1beta1
kind: KogitoSupportingService
metadata:
  name: data-index
spec:
  serviceType: DataIndex
  image: quay.io/kiegroup/kogito-data-index-postgresql:latest
  infra:
    - kogito-kafka-infra
  env:
    - name: QUARKUS_DATASOURCE_DB-KIND
      value: postgresql
    - name: QUARKUS_DATASOURCE_USERNAME
      value: postgres
    - name: QUARKUS_DATASOURCE_PASSWORD
      valueFrom:
        secretKeyRef:
          name: kogito-postgresql
          key: postgresql-password
    - name: QUARKUS_DATASOURCE_JDBC_URL
      value: jdbc:postgresql://kogito-postgresql.default.svc.cluster.local:5432/kogito
    - name: QUARKUS_HIBERNATE_ORM_DATABASE_GENERATION
      value:
    - name: QUARKUS_FLYWAY_MIGRATE_AT_START
      value: "true"

----

[#data-index-dev-service-details]
== {data_index_ref} as a Quarkus Development Service
When you use the {product_name} Process Quarkus extension, a temporary {data_index_ref} Service is automatically provisioned while the Quarkus application is running in development mode. When you use one of the following Quarkus extensions, the Dev Service is set up for immediate use:

> .Quarkus extension in {product_name}

Reviewer 4: No need to mention kogito-quarkus or processes, these docs are only in the context or serverless workflow.

Author: @cristianonicolai I replaced that by kogito-quarkus-serverless-workflow in this case, could it makes sense?

----

.Quarkus extension in {product_name}
[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.kie.kogito</groupId>
  <artifactId>kogito-quarkus-processes</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

When you start your Quarkus project in development mode, an in-memory instance of the Data Index Service is automatically started in the background. This feature is enabled by link:{dev_services_url}[Quarkus Dev Services], and leverages link:{test_containers_url}[Testcontainers] to start an image of the Data Index Service.

The {product_name} Process Quarkus extension sets up your Quarkus application to automatically replicate any {product_name} messaging events related to {workflow_instances} or jobs into the provisioned Data Index instance.

Once the service is up and running, you can query the GraphQL interface directly using `http://localhost:8180/graphql` or using the Quarkus Dev UI console `http://localhost:8080/q/dev`.

The {data_index_ref} GraphQL endpoint can query for `ProcessInstances` and `Jobs`. For more information about operations and attributes to query, see xref:data-index/data-index-core-concepts.adoc#data-index-graphql[GraphQL endpoint provided by {data_index_ref}] section.

> You can share the same {data_index_ref} instance across multiple {product_name} services during development. Sharing Data Index instances is enabled by default, therefore, only one Data Index instance is started. This behaviour can be adjusted to start multiple instances using the `quarkus.kogito.devservices.shared` property.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can share the same {data_index_ref} instance across multiple {product_name} services during development. Sharing Data Index instances is enabled by default, therefore, only one Data Index instance is started. This behavior can be adjusted to start multiple instances using the `quarkus.kogito.devservices.shared` property.
```

* To change the port where the Data Index Service runs, use the `quarkus.kogito.devservices.port=8180` property.
* To adjust the provisioned image, use `quarkus.kogito.devservices.imageName=quay.io/kiegroup/kogito-data-index-ephemeral` property.
* To disable sharing the Data Index instance across multiple Quarkus applications, use `quarkus.kogito.devservices.shared=false` property.

For more information about Quarkus Dev Services, see link:{dev_services_url}[Dev Services guide].

[#data-index-service-configuration-properties]
== Data Index Service configuration properties
The following table serves as a quick reference for commonly {data_index_ref} configuration properties supported.

.Common configuration properties
[cols="40%,35%,10%,10%,5%", options="header"]
|===
|Property|Description|Type|Default value|Override at runtime

|`QUARKUS_DATASOURCE_JDBC_URL`
| The datasource URL
| string
|
| Yes

|`QUARKUS_DATASOURCE_USERNAME`
| The datasource username
| string
|
| Yes

|`QUARKUS_DATASOURCE_PASSWORD`
| The datasource password
| string
|
| Yes

|`QUARKUS_DATASOURCE_DB_KIND`
a|The kind of database to connect: `postgresql`,..
|string
|
|Yes

> |`QUARKUS_HIBERNATE_ORM_DATABASE_GENERATION`

Reviewer 4: again, I think we shouldn't mention this

Author: removed!

[#data-index-service-distributions]
=== {data_index_ref} distributions
{data_index_ref} service can be deployed referencing directly a distributed {data_index_ref} image. Here there are the different {data_index_ref} image distributions that can be found in link:{distributions_url}[Quay.io/kiegroup]:

image::data-index/data-index-distributions.png[Image of data-index different available distributions]

=== {data_index_ref} standalone service deployment

There are several ways to deploy the {data_index_ref} service. But there are some common points in all the deployments:

. Reference the right {data_index_ref} image to match with the type of Database that will store the indexed data.
. Provide the database connection properties, to allow data index store the indexed data. {data_index_ref} service does not initialize its database schema automatically. To initialize the database schema, you need to enable Flyway migration by setting QUARKUS_FLYWAY_MIGRATE_AT_START=true.
. Define the `KOGITO_DATA_INDEX_QUARKUS_PROFILE` to set the way that the events will be connected (by default: `kafka-event-support`).

==== {data_index_ref} deployment resource example using Kafka eventing:

> Here you can see in example, how the {data_index_ref} resource definition as part of a docker-compose definition

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here you can see in example, how the {data_index_ref} resource definition can be deployed as part of a docker-compose definition
```

      QUARKUS_FLYWAY_MIGRATE_AT_START: "true" <4>
      QUARKUS_HIBERNATE_ORM_DATABASE_GENERATION: update
----

<1> Reference the right {data_index_ref} image to match with the type of Database, in this case `quay.io/kiegroup/kogito-data-index-postgresql:latest`
<2> Provide the database connection properties.
<3> When `KOGITO_DATA_INDEX_QUARKUS_PROFILE=kafka-events-support` or is not present, the {data_index_ref} is configured to use Kafka eventing.
<4> To initialize the database schema at start using flyway.

When kafka eventing is used, workflow applications need to be configured to send the events to the kafka topic `kogito-processinstances-events` allowing {data_index_ref} service to consume that, adding to application.properties:
[source,properties]
----
mp.messaging.outgoing.kogito-processinstances-events.connector=smallrye-kafka
mp.messaging.outgoing.kogito-processinstances-events.topic=kogito-processinstances-events
mp.messaging.outgoing.kogito-processinstances-events.value.serializer=org.apache.kafka.common.serialization.StringSerializer
----
---

==== {data_index_ref} deployment resource example using Knative eventing:

> This deployment definition resource shows how the {data_index_ref} service configured and deployed to connect with an existing PostgreSQL database and to consume Knative events.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This deployment definition resource shows how the {data_index_ref} service configured and deployed can connect with an existing PostgreSQL database and to consume Knative events.
```

> .Example `DataIndex` resource with PostgreSQL persistence and Knative eventing in a minikube environment :

Reviewer: `minikube environment` is important here ?

suggestion:
```suggestion
.Example `DataIndex` resource with PostgreSQL persistence and Knative eventing in a kubernetes environment :
```

            - name: QUARKUS_HTTP_CORS_ORIGINS
              value: /.*/
            - name: QUARKUS_FLYWAY_MIGRATE_AT_START <4>
              value: "true"
            - name: KOGITO_DATA_INDEX_QUARKUS_PROFILE <3>
              value: "http-events-support"
            - name: QUARKUS_HTTP_PORT
              value: "8080"
---
apiVersion: eventing.knative.dev/v1
kind: Trigger <5>
metadata:
  name: data-index-service-postgresql-processes-trigger
spec:
  broker: default
  filter:
    attributes:
      type: ProcessInstanceEvent <6>
  subscriber:
    ref:
      apiVersion: v1
      kind: Service
      name: data-index-service-postgresql
    uri: /processes <7>
---
apiVersion: eventing.knative.dev/v1
kind: Trigger <5>
metadata:
  name: data-index-service-postgresql-jobs-trigger
spec:
  broker: default
  filter:
    attributes:
      type: JobEvent <6>
  subscriber:
    ref:
      apiVersion: v1
      kind: Service
      name: data-index-service-postgresql
    uri: /jobs <7>
----
<1> Reference the right {data_index_ref} image to match with the type of Database, in this case `quay.io/kiegroup/kogito-data-index-postgresql:latest`
<2> Provide the database connection properties

> <3> KOGITO_DATA_INDEX_QUARKUS_PROFILE: http-events-support to use the http-connector.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<3> KOGITO_DATA_INDEX_QUARKUS_PROFILE: http-events-support to use the http-connector with Knative eventing
```

<4> To initialize the database schema at start using flyway
<5> Trigger definition to filter the events that arrive to the Sink and pass them to {data_index_ref}
<6> Type of event to filter
<7> The URI where the {data_index_ref} service is expecting to consume those types of events.

This deployment is using KOGITO_DATA_INDEX_QUARKUS_PROFILE: http-events-support. Workflow applications need to configure the connector to use `quarkus-http` and send the events to the Knative `K_SINK`:
[source,properties]
----
mp.messaging.outgoing.kogito-processinstances-events.connector=quarkus-http
mp.messaging.outgoing.kogito-processinstances-events.url=${K_SINK}
mp.messaging.outgoing.kogito-processinstances-events.method=POST

> ----

Reviewer: Same apply here, those should be defined as environment variables in the Deployment

[NOTE]
====
You can find more information about Knative eventing and `K_SINK` environment variable in xref:eventing/consume-produce-events-with-knative-eventing.adoc[]
====

A full example where the {data_index_ref} service standalone is deployed using Knative eventing can be found as part of xref:use-cases/timeout-showcase-example.adoc#execute-quarkus-project-standalone-services[Quarkus Workflow Project with standalone services] guide.

> When this {data_index_ref} service is deployed, a link:{kubernetes_configmap_url}[`configMap`] resource is created for the `application.properties` configuration of the {data_index_ref} service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When this {data_index_ref} service is deployed, a link:{kubernetes_configmap_url}[`configMap`] resource is created for the `application.properties` configuration of the {data_index_ref} service.
```

Now I see the path :)

But what is creating the configmap ? I mean Data Index is not managed by the Kogito Serverless Operator.
So unless you created the ConfigMap in the above example yaml, it does not exist and is not link to the Deployment ...

I would say the best way to add properties to the Data Index for now is via env vars.

In this case {data_index_ref} is ready to consume the events sent to the topics: `kogito-processinstances-events` and `kogito-jobs-events`.

[IMPORTANT]
====
It is important to configure the workflows application to send the events to the topic `kogito-processinstances-events`  using the connector `smallrye-kafka`. More information about how to configure workflows Kafka eventing is available in xref:eventing/consume-producing-events-with-kafka.adoc[] guide.

To explore the specific configuration to add to the workflow to connect with {data_index_ref} using Kafka eventing see xref:data-index/data-index-core-concepts.adoc#_kafka_eventing[{data_index_ref} Kafka eventing]

.Example of configuration in {product_name} application passed in application.properties to configure connection with {data_index_ref} using Kafka connector:
[source,properties]
----
mp.messaging.outgoing.kogito-processinstances-events.connector=smallrye-kafka
mp.messaging.outgoing.kogito-processinstances-events.topic=kogito-processinstances-events
mp.messaging.outgoing.kogito-processinstances-events.value.serializer=org.apache.kafka.common.serialization.StringSerializer
----
====

[NOTE]
====

> Usually, when using docker-compose the workflow application generates the container image that is added to docker-compose. If the Kafka eventing configuration values weren't there before the container image creation, they need to be passed as image extra environment variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Usually, when using docker-compose the workflow application generates the container image that is added to docker-compose. If the Kafka eventing configuration values weren't there before the container image creation, they need to be passed as environment variables.
```

<6> Type of event to filter
<7> The URI where the {data_index_ref} service is expecting to consume those types of events.

This deployment is using `KOGITO_DATA_INDEX_QUARKUS_PROFILE: http-events-support`. Workflow applications need to configure the connector to use `quarkus-http` and send the events to the Knative `K_SINK`.
You can find more information about Knative eventing and `K_SINK` environment variable in xref:eventing/consume-produce-events-with-knative-eventing.adoc[]

To explore the specific configuration to add to the workflow to connect with {data_index_ref} using Knative eventing see xref:data-index/data-index-core-concepts.adoc#_knative_eventing[{data_index_ref} Knative eventing]

.Example of configuration in {product_name} application `application.properties` file to send events to {data_index_ref} using Knative eventing
[source,properties]
----
mp.messaging.outgoing.kogito-processinstances-events.connector=quarkus-http
mp.messaging.outgoing.kogito-processinstances-events.url=${K_SINK}
mp.messaging.outgoing.kogito-processinstances-events.method=POST
----

[NOTE]
====

> If that configuration values weren't there before the container image creation, they need to be passed as image extra environment variables. More details about customizing Quarkus generated images can be found in {quarkus_container_image_customizing_url}[Quarkus Container Images Customizing] guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If that configuration values weren't there before the container image creation, they need to be passed as environment variables. More details about customizing Quarkus generated images can be found in {quarkus_container_image_customizing_url}[Quarkus Container Images Customizing] guide.
```
